---
title: 'Bayesian Logistic Regression Model'
date: 2024-08-25
permalink: /posts/2024/08/BLRM/
tags:
  - Phase I trial
  - Bayesian Inference
---

The primary purpose of the phase I clinical trial is to identify the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) based on the toxicity profile. Despite the dominance of the 3+3 design, the disadvantages are also obvious. Hence, the model-based designs are adapted to achieve better performance. Model-based designs estimate the dose-toxicity curve with a statistical model, and use the model to assign subjects to the most suitable dose level. After the stopping criteria are met, the design will stop and estimate the MTD.

This article will focus on a famous model-based design called the Bayesian logistic regression model (BLRM). The design is the modification of the continual reassessment method (CRM). For BLRM design, assume the dose-response curve follows a logistic regression model. The model can be represented as follows:

$$
\text{logit}(p_j) = \log \alpha + \beta \log ( d / d^* )
$$

where $$p_j$$ is the toxicity probability at level $$j$$ from 1 to $$J$$ (the number of dose levels), $$d_j$$ is the dosage, and $$d^*$$ is the reference dose. 

To guarantee the monotonicity assumption for the dose-toxicity curve, the coefficient $$\beta$$ should be greater than 0. A bivariate normal distribution prior assigned to $$(\log \alpha, \log \beta)$$ to ensure that $$\beta$$ is positive. 

For the convenience of explanation, set the targeted toxicity and maximum sample size as 0.25 and 36, respectively.

The probability interval [0, 1] is split into three or four nonoverlapping sub-intervals which are called under-targeted interval (UTI), targeted target interval (TTI), and over-targeted interval (OTI). Take three sub-intervals as examples. We can split the interval to
1. UTI = $$[0.00, 0.20)$$
2. TTI = $$[0.20, 0.30]$$
3. OTI = $$(0.30, 1.00]$$

The targeted target interval is decided by $$0.25–0.05$$ and $$0.25+0.05$$. In other words, the gap is specified as 0.05. The TTI, say 0.05, is applied to account for the uncertainty around the true targeted toxicity. The posterior probabilities of UTI, TTI, and OTI are denoted by P(UTI), P(TTI), and P(OTI), respectively.

Decision-making is as follows. The optimal dose $$j^*$$ is defined as 

$$
j^* = \arg \max_j P_j(TTI)
$$

Assume the current dose level is $$j$$. Then,
1. Escalate the dose level if $$j^* > j$$
2. Stay at the same dose level if $$j^* = j$$
3. De-escalate the dose level if $$j^* < j$$

Sequentially assign 3 patients in each cohort, until the stopping criteria are met. For example, if the maximum sample size is attained, then the design will stop.

For the safety issue, the design also employs escalation with overdose control (EWOC). It means when we want to escalate the dose level, we should check whether the posterior probability of OTI is smaller than a pre-specified threshold. Traditionally, the threshold is set as $$\eta$$, say 0.25; that is,

$$
P_j(OTI) < \eta
$$

Only if the EWOC satisfies, we can assign subjects to the next dose level.

In summary, BLRM design proceeds as follows:
1. BLRM starts the trial by treating the first cohort of patients at the lowest dose.
2. Suppose the current dose level is j and the trial has treated a total of n patients, we determine the optimal dose level according to

$$
\begin{aligned}
&j^* = \arg \max_{j \in \mathcal{A}} P_j(TTI) \\
& \text{where} \mathcal{A} = \{ j: P_j(OTI) < \eta \}
\end{aligned}
$$

3. Based on the optimal dose level\\
   (1) if $$j^* > j$$, escalate the dose for one level;\\
   (2) if $$j^* < j$$, de-escalate the dose for one level;\\
   (3) otherwise, the dose stays at the same level $$j$$.


Note that the trial can be either stopped after exhaustion of the maximum sample size ($$N=36$$), or a number of patients with DLT greater than 6 at any level, or be terminated early for safety if the lowest dose level is too toxic.

### Benefits of the BLRM design:
1. utilizes the accumulating data without only considering the current cohort.
2. have relatively better performance compared to the 3+3 design.

### Drawbacks of the BLRM design:
3. the decisions are not transparent. In other words, the designs are more complex than the 3+3 design.
4. for the BLRM design, two parameters might be not robust compared to the CRM design due to the limited sample size.

The provided GitHub repository demonstrates a simulation of the Bayesian Logistic Regression Model (BLRM) design for dose-finding trials via R code. The repository can be accessed at the following URL: https://github.com/cyang728/BLRM_trial.git






